_drafts/useful-links.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Useful data management links
category: resources
image: /assets/images/placeholders/books-small.jpg
---

Links to useful external sources on data management with brief summaries.

### Practical advice

- [Ten Simple Rules for Creating a Good Data Management Plan](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004525)
  <br />
  Article by William K. Michener published in PLOS Computational Biology
  describing how to write a good data management plan putting the steps into the
  context of the data life cycle. .
- [Ten Simple Rules for Digital Data Storage](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005097)
  <br />
  Article by Edmund M. Hart et al. published in PLOS Computational Biology
  giving practical advice on how to store and organise data files.
- [How to share data with a statistician](https://github.com/jtleek/datasharing)
  <br />
  Guide by Jeff Leek giving practical advice on how to share data with a
  statistician or data scientist
- [Tidy Data](http://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v059.i10)
  <br />
  Article by Hadley Wickham published in the Journal of Statistical Software
  introducing the concept of "tidy data", a specific structure that makes it
  easier to visualise and work with the tabular data. 


### Principles

- [The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18)
  <br />
  Article by Mark D. Wilkinson et al. published in Scientific Data describing
  principles required for machines to be able to discover and consume data.
- [10 aspects of highly effective research data](https://www.elsevier.com/connect/10-aspects-of-highly-effective-research-data)
  <br />
  Blog post by Anita de Waard, Helena Cousijn, and IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg
  describing an extension of the FAIR principles that is meant to function as a
  roadmap for incremental and continual improvements of data management processes
  and systems.


### Implementations

- [Implementing a genomic data management system using iRODS in the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-361)
  <br />
  Article by Gen-Tao Chiang et al. published in BMC Bioinformatics describing
  their experience of implementing a data management solution using iRODS to
  manage the large volumes of sequencing data generated within the Wellcome Trust
  Sanger Institute. 
- [openBIS: a flexible framework for managing and analyzing complex data in biology research](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-468)
  <br />
  Article by Angela Bauch et al. published in BMC Bioinformatics describing the
  implementation and usage of openBIS, a framework for constructing information
  systems for managing biological data.

Commit message:

Improvements to the useful links resource

_drafts/useful-links.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Data management resources and reading
category: resources
image: /assets/images/placeholders/books-small.jpg
---

Need to learn more about data management? Here is a list of useful reading
material with brief summaries to help steer you towards those relevant to you.
The resources have been classified into three categories: practical advice,
principles, and implementations.

### Practical advice

- [Ten Simple Rules for Creating a Good Data Management Plan](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004525)
  <br />
  Article by William K. Michener published in PLOS Computational Biology
  describing how to write a good data management plan in ten simple rules.
  Each of the rules placed in the context of the data life cycle.
- [Ten Simple Rules for Digital Data Storage](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005097)
  <br />
  Article by Edmund M. Hart et al. published in PLOS Computational Biology
  giving practical advice on how to store and organise data files.
- [How to share data with a statistician](https://github.com/jtleek/datasharing)
  <br />
  Guide by Jeff Leek giving practical advice on how to share data with a
  statistician or data scientist.
- [Tidy Data](http://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v059.i10)
  <br />
  Article by Hadley Wickham published in the Journal of Statistical Software
  introducing the concept of "tidy data", a specific structure that makes it
  easier to visualise and work with tabular data. 


### Principles

- [The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18)
  <br />
  Article by Mark D. Wilkinson et al. published in Scientific Data describing
  principles required for machines to be able to discover and consume data.
  The FAIR principles described are: Findability, Accessibility,
  Interoperability, and Reusability.
- [10 aspects of highly effective research data](https://www.elsevier.com/connect/10-aspects-of-highly-effective-research-data)
  <br />
  Blog post in Elsevier by Anita de Waard, Helena Cousijn, and IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg
  describing an extension of the FAIR principles that is meant to function as a
  roadmap for incremental and continual improvements of data management processes
  and systems.


### Implementations

- [Implementing a genomic data management system using iRODS in the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-361)
  <br />
  Article by Gen-Tao Chiang et al. published in BMC Bioinformatics describing
  their experience of implementing a data management solution using iRODS to
  manage the large volumes of sequencing data generated within the Wellcome Trust
  Sanger Institute. 
- [openBIS: a flexible framework for managing and analyzing complex data in biology research](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-468)
  <br />
  Article by Angela Bauch et al. published in BMC Bioinformatics describing the
  implementation and usage of openBIS, a framework for constructing information
  systems for managing biological data.
